OSDOCS#13398: Expand etcd quorum restoration docs (#88791)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/dr-restoring-etcd-quorum-ha.adoc

You might experience data loss if the host that runs the restoration does not have all data replicated to it.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Quorum restoration should not be used to decrease the number of nodes outside of the restoration process. Decreasing the number of nodes results in an unsupported cluster configuration.
====

.Prerequisites

* You have SSH access to the node used to restore quorum.

.Procedure

> . Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. You run the restore operation on this host. You can choose any of the surviving nodes to run the recovery on.

Author: Do these instructions also apply to the "Restoring to a previous cluster state" procedure? The same step is used in both.

> . Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. You run the restore operation on this host. You can choose any of the surviving nodes to run the recovery on.

Reviewer: No, because in that case, they're restoring from a backup, so all data is replaced on the running nodes. Here, if they don't pick an in-sync node (node with current data) then they would have data loss. This scenario is unlikely, because etcd tries to keep it in sync, but it is possible for a node to be (for some, usually small amount of time) behind.

. Using SSH,  connect to the chosen recovery node and run the following command to restore etcd quorum:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo -E /usr/local/bin/quorum-restore.sh
----
+
After a few minutes, the nodes that went down are automatically synchronized with the node that the recovery script was run on. Any remaining online nodes automatically rejoin the new etcd cluster created by the `quorum-restore.sh` script. This process takes a few minutes.

. Exit the SSH session.

. Return to a three-node configuration if any nodes are offline. Use the original installation method, installer-provisioned or user-provisioned, to replace the nodes. Nodes automatically join the etcd cluster once reprovisioned. This process takes some time.

> 

Reviewer 2: A node can be lost due to network split (which is fixed by recovering network access to the standing cluster node(s) or hardware failure, which might certainly require reinstallation. There might be other causes too. 
I don't know if the recovery/reinstallation can be done using the openshift-installer as explained (IPI/UPI methods) though. Can you confirm this?

Reviewer: In IPI or UPI with Machine API, all that should need to be done to replace a node is to delete the bad machine(s) and they'll be re-added by the Machine API and then the CEO will reconcile the etcd instances.
In UPI without machine api, then the user has to recreate the machine in whatever way they originally created. 

Could probably pull these steps and language from the old restoration docs.

Reviewer 2: Does this depend on ControlPlaneMachineSet being supported? Bare metal is the main target of this feature and support for it isn't formalized https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/machine_management/control_plane_machine_management/cpmso-getting-started.html#cpmso-platform-matrix_cpmso-getting-started if this is a requirement, that is.

Reviewer: I'm referencing the old docs for disaster recovery where machines are needed to be replaced after restore: step 15 https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/backup_and_restore/control_plane_backup_and_restore/disaster_recovery/scenario-2-restoring-cluster-state.html

If a node is alive, then everything should just reconcile, but if there's a node that's offline (or the datacenter burnt down), then the user will need to replace the node; I was thinking of just reusing this language since it's worked in the past.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for pointing to the source of the info, that makes sense.

Reviewer 2: > Could probably pull these steps and language from the old restoration docs

Agreed, or even point to them? Wdyt @kowen-rh?

Author: We can pull the steps from the previous documentation IMO.

. Select a control plane host to use as the recovery host. You run the restore operation on this host.

.. List the etcd pods by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get pods -n openshift-etcd -l etcd

Reviewer: Slight tweak: 
```oc get pods -n openshift-etcd -l app=etcd --field-selector="status.phase==Running"```
Will only get the running ones.

----

.. Choose a pod and run the following command to obtain its IP address:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec -n openshift-etcd <etcd-pod> -c etcdctl -- etcdctl endpoint status -w table
----
+
Note the IP address of a member that is not a learner and has the highest Raft index.

.. Run the following command and note the node name that corresponds to the IP address of the chosen etcd member:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get nodes -o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}[{.metadata.name},{.status.addresses[?(@.type=="InternalIP")].address}]{end}'
----

. Using SSH, connect to the chosen recovery node and run the following command to restore etcd quorum:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo -E /usr/local/bin/quorum-restore.sh
----
+
After a few minutes, the nodes that went down are automatically synchronized with the node that the recovery script was run on. Any remaining online nodes automatically rejoin the new etcd cluster created by the `quorum-restore.sh` script. This process takes a few minutes.

. Exit the SSH session.

> . Return to a three-node configuration if any nodes are offline. Repeat the following steps for each node that is offline to delete and recreate them. After the machines are recreated, a new revision is forced and etcd automatically scales up.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Return to a three-node configuration if any nodes are offline. Repeat the following steps for each node that is offline to delete and recreate them. After the machines are re-created, a new revision is forced and etcd automatically scales up.
```
See ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#r

+
** If you use a user-provisioned bare-metal installation, you can recreate a control plane machine by using the same method that you used to originally create it. For more information, see "Installing a user-provisioned cluster on bare metal".
+
[WARNING]
====

> Do not delete and recreate the machine for the recovery host.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do not delete and re-create the machine for the recovery host.
```
See ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#r

====
+
** If you are running installer-provisioned infrastructure, or you used the Machine API to create your machines, follow these steps:
+
[WARNING]
====

> Do not delete and recreate the machine for the recovery host.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do not delete and re-create the machine for the recovery host.
```
See ISG: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#r

For bare-metal installations on installer-provisioned infrastructure, control plane machines are not re-created. For more information, see "Replacing a bare-metal control plane node".
====

.. Obtain the machine for one of the offline nodes.
+
In a terminal that has access to the cluster as a `cluster-admin` user, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get machines -n openshift-machine-api -o wide
----
+

> Example output:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example output:
```
I can't find the formal reference but I "think"  the  'Example output' should have a leading period? For example, `.Example output`. Feel free to ignore this though because I can't find the directive; it is just in my mind. :-)

Author: I think you're right. This came from the previous docs and I didn't notice. Thanks for catching that!

clustername-8qw5l-master-2                  Running        m4.xlarge   us-east-1   us-east-1c   3h37m   ip-10-0-154-194.ec2.internal    aws:///us-east-1c/i-02626f1dba9ed5bba  running
clustername-8qw5l-master-3                  Provisioning   m4.xlarge   us-east-1   us-east-1a   85s     ip-10-0-173-171.ec2.internal    aws:///us-east-1a/i-015b0888fe17bc2c8  running <1>
clustername-8qw5l-worker-us-east-1a-wbtgd   Running        m4.large    us-east-1   us-east-1a   3h28m   ip-10-0-129-226.ec2.internal   aws:///us-east-1a/i-010ef6279b4662ced   running
clustername-8qw5l-worker-us-east-1b-lrdxb   Running        m4.large    us-east-1   us-east-1b   3h28m   ip-10-0-144-248.ec2.internal   aws:///us-east-1b/i-0cb45ac45a166173b   running
clustername-8qw5l-worker-us-east-1c-pkg26   Running        m4.large    us-east-1   us-east-1c   3h28m   ip-10-0-170-181.ec2.internal   aws:///us-east-1c/i-06861c00007751b0a   running
----
<1> The new machine, `clustername-8qw5l-master-3` is being created and is ready after the phase changes from `Provisioning` to `Running`.
+

> It might take a few minutes for the new machine to be created. The etcd cluster Operator will automatically synchronize when the machine or node returns to a healthy state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It might take a few minutes for the new machine to be created. The etcd cluster Operator automatically synchronizes when the machine or node returns to a healthy state.
```
